Article: Ehi! What's up? Feedback to users' requests in distributed systems (#202)
mauroservienti/milestone.github.io: _posts/2021-01-12-feedback-to-users-requests-in-distributed-systems.md

tags:
- Distributed Systems
- Users feedback
---

One of the most asked questions during my distributed systems related presentations or training is usually something along the lines of:

> How can we handle feedback to users' requests if the processing of these requests is asynchronous?

In essence, the problem is more or less the following:

- A user sends a request from the application user interface, let's say a web UI
- The request is dispatched, by the receiving web server, onto a queue as a message
- A backend service dequeues the request message and processes it
- Once the backend has completed processing the request message, it publishes a response message to the queuing system

In such a scenario, how do we correlated back the original incoming web request to the message later published by the backend service? And once we can do that, how can we send this information back to the user interface to notify the user that initiated the task?
Let's try to dive into both problems, they are somewhat correlated, and they hide many nuances.

> When moving from node to node, from endpoint to endpoint, or from service to service, asynchronous requests lose their context. For example, when a web application user sends a request, the receiving web server keeps the user context until it completes the request processing. Once completed, e.g., by dispatching the same request as a message onto a queue, the incoming request HTTP context is lost. To reply to the originating user, the system needs to track the context when messages and data move across endpoints. Tracking context can be done using a technique called message correlation. The first endpoint in the system that generates a message, the webserver in our sample, appends a new correlation ID to the outgoing message. The promise is that each processing endpoint copies the same correlation ID to messages sent or published in the context of the incoming message. Using the sample at the beginning of this article, the flow would be:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When moving from node to node, from endpoint to endpoint, or from service to service, asynchronous requests lose their context. For example, when a web application user sends a request, the receiving web server keeps the user context until it completes the request processing. Once completed, e.g., by dispatching the same request as a message onto a queue, the incoming request HTTP context is lost. To reply to the originating user, the system needs to track the context when messages and data move across endpoints. Tracking context can be done using a technique called message correlation. The first endpoint in the system that generates a message, the web server in our sample, appends a new correlation ID to the outgoing message. The promise is that each processing endpoint copies the same correlation ID to messages sent or published in the context of the incoming message. Using the sample at the beginning of this article, the flow would be:
```

> - the webserver

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- the web server
```

> Q: Is it enough to persist the correlation ID at the webserver level?
> A: Yes, it is.

What's wrong, or better yet risky, is to generate the correlation ID at the webserver. The situation to avoid is to have a user request that cannot be correlated back to a user. How can that even happen? It might be a corner case; the user sends the first request and never receives an ACK response with the generated correlation ID. The system can process the request, but users have no correlation ID to understand if and when the processing completes. The correlation ID generation needs to move to the client. For example, in a web application, the correlation ID generation needs to happen in the browser or the web application client. By generating and storing the correlation ID in the client application, there is no way the user cannot correlate any response to issued requests. In any case, it's essential to store the correlation ID at the webserver level, too; this because web servers can be scaled out, and users cannot.

> ## Watch'a talkin' 'bout?

Author: That's exactly the citation I'm pointing at 😄

- The web server accepted the user request and, after doing all the ceremonies, sends a message to the backend service
- The backend service completes the request processing and sends back a response message to the webserver.

> Q: To which webserver instance?

> If web servers are scaled out and use a queue to communicate with backend services, there is no guarantee that the backend service response message goes to the same web server instance that sent out the initial request. If there was no user, and no WebSockets, involved we had no problems, scaled out instances can be designed to be stateless, and thus, what instance handles a message is not that important. A device using WebSocket connects directly to a specific web server instance. In such a scenario, if the user sends the initial request to web server instance A, and web server instance B is handling the response message from the backend service, there is no user's WebSocket connected to instance B. The status is lost because web server instance B is missing some context or information to talk back to the user's device.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If web servers are scaled out and use a queue to communicate with backend services, there is no guarantee that the backend service response message goes to the same web server instance that sent out the initial request. If there was no user, and no WebSockets, involved we had no problems; scaled out instances can be designed to be stateless, and thus, the particular instance that handles a message is not important. But a device using WebSockets connects directly to a specific web server instance. In this scenario, if the user sends the initial request to web server instance A, and web server instance B is handling the response message from the backend service, there is no user's WebSocket connected to instance B. The status is lost because web server instance B is missing some context or information to talk back to the user's device.
```

## Backplanes to the rescue.

> The solution to this second set of issues is to use a backplane. Backplanes are a side communication channel a set of scaled out service instances can use to communicate among themselves. From the main communication channel perspective, the one used to share information across the entire system, a set of scaled out instances wants to appear as a single logical unit. For this reason, they are usually referred to as a logical service. From a sender's perspective, it doesn't really matter which instance will handle a request; they route the request to the logical destination. The same happens from a recipient's perspective. It doesn't matter which instance sent the request; most of the time, it's the logical sender that is the only thing that matters. There are cases, such as the WebSockets one, in which the physical instances matter a lot. A failure in addressing the correct instance breaks the whole communication chain.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The solution to this second set of issues is to use a backplane. Backplanes are a side communication channel, a set of scaled out service that instances can use to communicate among themselves. From the main communication channel perspective, the one used to share information across the entire system, a set of scaled out instances wants to appear as a single logical unit. For this reason, they are usually referred to as a logical service. From a sender's perspective, it doesn't really matter which instance will handle a request; they route the request to the logical destination. The same happens from a recipient's perspective. It doesn't matter which instance sent the request; most of the time, it's the logical sender that is the only thing that matters. There are cases, such as the WebSockets one, in which the physical instances matter a lot. A failure in addressing the correct instance breaks the whole communication chain.
```

> A simple solution would be to address the response to the webserver instance that initially handled the user request. However, that's not so simple. The web server instance might not exist anymore; the user WebSocket connection might have dropped and reconnected to a different web server instance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A simple solution would be to address the response to the web server instance that initially handled the user request. However, that's not so simple. The web server instance might not exist anymore; the user WebSocket connection might have dropped and reconnected to a different web server instance.
```

> Many things can happen to make routing the response to a specific instance less effective than expected. Not to say that allowing senders to route to a specific instance brings to the table one of the distributed systems fallacies: topology doesn't change. Topology changes all the time, and there is no easy and cheap way to guarantee that recipients will be where senders expect them to be.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Many things can happen to make routing the response to a specific instance less effective than expected. Not to mention that allowing senders to route to a specific instance highlights one of the fallacies of distributed systems: topology doesn't change. Topology changes all the time, and there is no easy and cheap way to guarantee that recipients will be where senders expect them to be.
```

> Backplanes allow hiding away from senders the recipients' topology. When one of the scaled-out instances receives a message from the system, it notifies all the other instances through the backplane. The backplane could be using the exact same mechanism the system uses to communicate to peers in the logical service; it could be using a message/queue-based approach or a completely different one, for example, Redis pub/sub.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Backplanes hide the recipients' topology from senders. When one of the scaled-out instances receives a message from the system, it notifies all the other instances through the backplane. The backplane could be using the exact same mechanism the system uses to communicate to peers in the logical service; it could be using a message/queue-based approach or a completely different one, for example, Redis pub/sub.
```

> Once the backplane is in place, the full communication flow is like the following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once the backplane is in place, the full communication flow is this:
```

- The client:

>   - generates a unique identifier to use as correlation ID for a request

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - generates a unique identifier to use as a correlation ID for a request
```

  - creates the request payload and appends the identifier
  - stores the identifier locally

>   - sends the request to the webserver

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - sends the request to the web server
```

> - the webserver (instance)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- the web server instance
```

  - receives the user request 
  - converts the user request into a message
  - stores the received correlation ID into message headers alongside the connected WebSocket client ID

>   - sends the message

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - sends the message to its respective queue/handler
```

>   - sends back to the user an ACK (e.g., 202 Accepted)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - sends an ACK message back to the user acknowledging the request (e.g., 202 Accepted)
```

> - the backend service (instance)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- the backend service instance
```

  - receives the message
  - processes the request
  - creates the response message
  - copies the correlation ID from the incoming message headers to the outgoing message headers

>   - send the response message

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - sends the response message back to the web server
```

> - the webserver (instance):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- the (possibly different) web server instance:
```

  - gets the correlation ID from the incoming message
  - looks for the stored correlation ID and client WebSocket ID

>     - if it cannot find it, it means that someone else already dealt with the response, and this attempt is probably a duplicate message

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - if it cannot find it, someone else has already dealt with the response, and this attempt is probably a duplicate message and can be discarded
```

  - checks if the client is connected:
    - if it is, uses the WebSocket connection to inform the client about the status
    - if it's not, uses the backplane to propagate the received information to other web server instances.
    
### The elephant in the room

> One aspect that we haven't touched, it probably deserves its own set of articles, is how to handle results eventual consistency at the user interface level. My colleague Dennis Van Der Stelt does an excellent job in a [presentation he gave at Oredev](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jTz74m1KbBs).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One aspect that we haven't touched is how to handle eventual consistency results at the user interface level. This probably deserves its own set of articles but my colleague Dennis Van Der Stelt does an excellent job in a [presentation he gave at Oredev](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jTz74m1KbBs).
```

## Wrap up 

> As the reader can probably spot, a lot is going on. Handling a request asynchronously and, at the same time, providing feedback to the user brings a lot of complexity into the system. It's essential to evaluate if all this complexity is required; all the moving pieces need to be governed and maintained over time. One of the biggest lessons I've learned in my career is that using the same technique, architecture, or even technology in the entire system is the worst thing we can do. We'll end up with complexity where we don't need it and simplicity where too simple is harmful. Even if it might seem more complicated initially, it's worth evaluating each scenario and deciding how to design that specific scenario in isolation. I'm sure there will be a few scenarios where asynchronicity is required and many others where a much simpler approach is a better fit.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As you've probably noticed by now, a lot is going on. Handling a request asynchronously and, at the same time, providing feedback to the user brings a lot of complexity into the system. It's essential to evaluate if all this complexity is required; all the moving pieces need to be governed and maintained over time. One of the biggest lessons I've learned in my career is that using the same technique, architecture, or even technology in the entire system is the worst thing we can do. We'll end up with complexity where we don't need it and simplicity where too simple is harmful. Even if it might seem more complicated initially, it's worth evaluating each scenario and deciding how to design that specific scenario in isolation. I'm sure there will be a few scenarios where asynchronicity is required and many others where a much simpler approach is a better fit.
```
